README.md, before:

# NL-Augmenter 🦎 → 🐍

The NL-Augmenter is a collaborative effort intended to accumulate all transformations operating over tasks dealing with natural language. We invite submissions of transformations to this framework by way of GitHub pull request, through August 1, 2021. All submitters of accepted transformation will be included as co-authors on a paper announcing this framework. 

The framework organizers can be contacted at gem-benchmark@googlegroups.com.

**Submission timeline**

| Due date          | Description                                                                 |
| ------------------ | -----------                                                                 |
| August 1, 2021 | Pull request must be opened to be eligible for inclusion in the framework and associated paper  |
| August 22, 2021 | Review process for pull request above must be complete           |

The transformation can be revised between the pull request submission and pull request merge deadlines. We expect that most transformations will undergo revisions based on reviewer feedback.

Transformations which are already accepted to NL-Augmenter are summarized in [this table](transformations/README.md). Transformations undergoing review can be seen as [pull requests](https://github.com/GEM-benchmark/NL-Augmenter/pulls).

**Table of contents**

* [Colab notebook](#colab-notebook)
* [Installation](#installation)
* [How do I create a transformation?](#how-do-i-create-a-transformation)
* [Review Criteria for Accepting Submissions](#review-criteria)

## Colab notebook

<a href="https://github.com/GEM-benchmark/NL-Augmenter" target="_parent"><img src="https://colab.research.google.com/assets/colab-badge.svg" alt="Open In Colab"/></a> 

## Installation
```bash
# When creating a new transformation, replace this with your forked repository (see below)
git clone https://github.com/GEM-benchmark/NL-Augmenter.git
cd NL-Augmenter
python setup.py sdist
pip install https://github.com/explosion/spacy-models/releases/download/en_core_web_sm-2.2.0/en_core_web_sm-2.2.0.tar.gz
```

```bash
python main.py
```
Running it for the first time will take a while (depending on your internet speed) since the translation models need to be downloaded.

After you make any change, run test_main.py once to ensure that your changes don't regress anything.

```bash
pytest
```
 
And for any new logic, add the appropriate test case so that no one else breaks the changes. 

## How do I create a transformation?
### Setup

First, [fork the repository](https://docs.github.com/en/github/getting-started-with-github/fork-a-repo) in GitHub! :fork_and_knife:
<a href="https://docs.github.com/en/github/getting-started-with-github/fork-a-repo">
<div style="text-align:center"><img src="https://docs.github.com/assets/images/help/repository/fork_button.jpg" alt="fork button" width="500"/></div>
</a>

Your fork will have its own location, which we will call `PATH_TO_YOUR_FORK`.
Next, [clone the forked repository](https://docs.github.com/en/github/creating-cloning-and-archiving-repositories/cloning-a-repository) and create a branch for your transformation, which here we will call **my_awesome_transformation**:
```bash
git clone $PATH_TO_YOUR_FORK
cd NL-Augmenter
git checkout -b my_awesome_transformation
```
We will base our transformation on an existing example.
Create a new transformation directory by copying over an existing transformation:
```bash
cd transformation/
cp -r butter_fingers_perturbation my_awesome_transformation
cd my_awesome_transformation
```

### Creating a transformation
1. Rename the class `ButterFingersPerturbation` to `MyAwesomeTransformation` and choose one of the perturbation interfaces from the `interfaces` folder. Full list [here.](interfaces)
3. Now put all your creativity in implementing the `generate` method. If you intend to use external libraries, add them with their version numbers in `requirements.txt`
4. Once done add at least 5 example pairs as test cases in the file `test.json` so that no one breaks your code inadvertently and update `my_awesome_transformation/README.md`.

**Testing and evaluating**

Once the transformation is ready, test it:
```bash
pytest
```

### Submitting

Once the tests pass and you are happy with the transformation, submit your transformation for review.
First, commit and push your changes:
```bash
git add transformations/my_awesome_transformation/*
git commit -m "Added my_awesome_transformation"
git push --set-upstream origin my_awesome_transformation
```
Finally, [submit a pull request](https://docs.github.com/en/github/collaborating-with-issues-and-pull-requests/creating-a-pull-request).
The last `git push` command prints a URL that can be copied into a browser to initiate such a pull request.
Alternatively, you can do so from the GitHub website.
<a href="https://docs.github.com/en/github/collaborating-with-issues-and-pull-requests/creating-a-pull-request">
<div style="text-align:center"><img src="https://docs.github.com/assets/images/help/pull_requests/pull-request-start-review-button.png" alt="pull request button" width="500"/></div>
</a>

:sparkles: Congratulations, you've submitted a transformation to the perturbation repository! :sparkles:

Commit message:

Changes to run the test cases based on transformation type

README.md, after:

# NL-Augmenter 🦎 → 🐍

The NL-Augmenter is a collaborative effort intended to accumulate all transformations operating over tasks dealing with natural language. We invite submissions of transformations to this framework by way of GitHub pull request, through August 1, 2021. All submitters of accepted transformation will be included as co-authors on a paper announcing this framework. 

The framework organizers can be contacted at gem-benchmark@googlegroups.com.

**Submission timeline**

| Due date          | Description                                                                 |
| ------------------ | -----------                                                                 |
| August 1, 2021 | Pull request must be opened to be eligible for inclusion in the framework and associated paper  |
| August 22, 2021 | Review process for pull request above must be complete           |

The transformation can be revised between the pull request submission and pull request merge deadlines. We expect that most transformations will undergo revisions based on reviewer feedback.

Transformations which are already accepted to NL-Augmenter are summarized in [this table](transformations/README.md). Transformations undergoing review can be seen as [pull requests](https://github.com/GEM-benchmark/NL-Augmenter/pulls).

**Table of contents**

* [Colab notebook](#colab-notebook)
* [Installation](#installation)
* [How do I create a transformation?](#how-do-i-create-a-transformation)
* [Review Criteria for Accepting Submissions](#review-criteria)

## Colab notebook

<a href="https://github.com/GEM-benchmark/NL-Augmenter" target="_parent"><img src="https://colab.research.google.com/assets/colab-badge.svg" alt="Open In Colab"/></a> 

## Installation
```bash
# When creating a new transformation, replace this with your forked repository (see below)
git clone https://github.com/GEM-benchmark/NL-Augmenter.git
cd NL-Augmenter
python setup.py sdist
pip install https://github.com/explosion/spacy-models/releases/download/en_core_web_sm-2.2.0/en_core_web_sm-2.2.0.tar.gz
```

```bash
python main.py
```
Running it for the first time will take a while (depending on your internet speed) since the translation models need to be downloaded.

After you make any change, run test_main.py once by giving transformation type as parameter to ensure that your changes don't regress anything.

```bash
pytest -s --t=<transformation_type>
```

For example, to run 'butter_fingers_perturbation' test cases:
```bash
pytest -s --t=butter_fingers_perturbation
```
 
And for any new logic, add the appropriate test case so that no one else breaks the changes. 

## How do I create a transformation?
### Setup

First, [fork the repository](https://docs.github.com/en/github/getting-started-with-github/fork-a-repo) in GitHub! :fork_and_knife:
<a href="https://docs.github.com/en/github/getting-started-with-github/fork-a-repo">
<div style="text-align:center"><img src="https://docs.github.com/assets/images/help/repository/fork_button.jpg" alt="fork button" width="500"/></div>
</a>

Your fork will have its own location, which we will call `PATH_TO_YOUR_FORK`.
Next, [clone the forked repository](https://docs.github.com/en/github/creating-cloning-and-archiving-repositories/cloning-a-repository) and create a branch for your transformation, which here we will call **my_awesome_transformation**:
```bash
git clone $PATH_TO_YOUR_FORK
cd NL-Augmenter
git checkout -b my_awesome_transformation
```
We will base our transformation on an existing example.
Create a new transformation directory by copying over an existing transformation:
```bash
cd transformation/
cp -r butter_fingers_perturbation my_awesome_transformation
cd my_awesome_transformation
```

### Creating a transformation
1. Rename the class `ButterFingersPerturbation` to `MyAwesomeTransformation` and choose one of the perturbation interfaces from the `interfaces` folder. Full list [here.](interfaces)
3. Now put all your creativity in implementing the `generate` method. If you intend to use external libraries, add them with their version numbers in `requirements.txt`
4. Once done add at least 5 example pairs as test cases in the file `test.json` so that no one breaks your code inadvertently and update `my_awesome_transformation/README.md`.

**Testing and evaluating**

Once the transformation is ready, test it:
```bash
pytest -s --t=<transformation_type>
```

### Submitting

Once the tests pass and you are happy with the transformation, submit your transformation for review.
First, commit and push your changes:
```bash
git add transformations/my_awesome_transformation/*
git commit -m "Added my_awesome_transformation"
git push --set-upstream origin my_awesome_transformation
```
Finally, [submit a pull request](https://docs.github.com/en/github/collaborating-with-issues-and-pull-requests/creating-a-pull-request).
The last `git push` command prints a URL that can be copied into a browser to initiate such a pull request.
Alternatively, you can do so from the GitHub website.
<a href="https://docs.github.com/en/github/collaborating-with-issues-and-pull-requests/creating-a-pull-request">
<div style="text-align:center"><img src="https://docs.github.com/assets/images/help/pull_requests/pull-request-start-review-button.png" alt="pull request button" width="500"/></div>
</a>

:sparkles: Congratulations, you've submitted a transformation to the perturbation repository! :sparkles:
