filters/gender_bias/README.md, before:

## gender bias filter

## What type of a filter is this?

This is a trilingual filter (for English, French and Polish languages), which filters a text corpus to measure gender fairness in regards of a female gender representation.
It is based on a pre-defined set words, such as personal pronouns, words defining the relation and titles, corresponding to the female and male genders accordingly.
Two utility methods - flag_sentences(), count_genders() and sort_groups() give supplementary information to the boolean value returned by the main filter() method.

Author: Anna Shvets
Company:
Fablab by Inetum in Paris
157 Boulevard MacDonald
75019 Paris
France


## Why is measuring performance on this split important?
This filter can be used to define whether the female gender is sufficiently represented in a tested subset of sentences.
Being currently implemented for English, French and Polish languages, this filter is potentially language-agnostic, since does not rely on any external dependencies.

## Related Work
While the problematics of the gender fairness is an active domain of research in NLP, the current code represents an original implementation.

## Examples of use

```
f = GenderBiasFilter("en")
sentences = [ "He is going to make a cake.",
              "She is going to program",
              "Nobody likes washing dishes",
              "He agreed to help him" ]

f.filter(sentences)
```

The above statement returns True, as the number of sentences flagged as "masculine" is less than the number of sentences tagged as "feminine". 
You can check the exact number by calling the `count_genders()` static method on the instance of the class and providing it with the extracted flags with the `flag_sentences()` static method:
```
flagged_sentences = f.flag_sentences(sentences, "en")
feminine, masculine, neutral = f.count_genders(flagged_sentences)
print("Feminine flagged sentences:", feminine)
print("Masculine flagged sentences:", masculine)
print("Neutral flagged sentences:", neutral)
```

which outputs:
```
Feminine tagged sentences: 1
Masculine tagged sentences: 2
Neutral tagged sentences: 1
```
You can also retrieve the arrays of sentences from each group, by calling the `sort_groups()` method on the instance of th class, providing it with flags, extracted by `flag_sentences()` method:

```
flagged_sentences = f.flag_sentences(sentences, "en")
feminine_group, masculine_group, neutral_group = f.sort_groups(flagged_sentences)
print("This is a feminine group:", feminine_group)
print("This is a masculine group:", masculine_group)
print("This is a neutral group:", neutral_group)
```

which outputs:
```
This is a feminine group: ['She is going to program']
This is a masculine group: ['He is going to make a cake.', 'He agreed to help him']
This is a neutral group: ['Nobody likes washing dishes']
```
You are free to change the language at the class initialisation step:
```
sentences = [ "Il va preparer un gateau",
              "Elle va créer un logiciel",
              "Personne n'aime pas faire la vaiselle",
              "Maman va à la conférence" ]

f = GenderBiasFilter("fr")
f.filter(sentences)
```

There is also a possibility to extend the vocabulary of the gender definition keywords. Let us see the example of it:
```
feminine_input = ["wow"]
masculine_input = ["yey"]

f = GenderBiasFilter("en", feminine_input, masculine_input)
sentences = [ "He is going to make a cake.",
              "She is going to program",
              "Nobody likes washing dishes",
              "He agreed to help him",
              "Wow , it works!",
              "Yey !!!!"]

f.filter(sentences)
```
which outputs `True`!
Now let's see the statistics and the sentences that sorted to each of the groups:

```
flagged_sentences = f.flag_sentences(sentences, "en", feminine_input, masculine_input)
feminine, masculine, neutral = f.count_genders(flagged_sentences)
print("Feminine flagged sentences:", feminine)
print("Masculine flagged sentences:", masculine)
print("Neutral flagged sentences:", neutral)
```
outputs:
```
Feminine flagged sentences: 2
Masculine flagged sentences: 3
Neutral flagged sentences: 1
```

and this piece of code gives us the exact sentences:
```
flagged_sentences = f.flag_sentences(sentences, "en", feminine_input, masculine_input)
feminine_group, masculine_group, neutral_group = f.sort_groups(flagged_sentences)
print("This is a feminine group:", feminine_group)
print("This is a masculine group:", masculine_group)
print("This is a neutral group:", neutral_group)
```
which outputs:
```
This is a feminine group: ['She is going to program', 'Wow , it works!']
This is a masculine group: ['He is going to make a cake.', 'He agreed to help him', 'Yey !!!!']
This is a neutral group: ['Nobody likes washing dishes']
```

## What are the limitations of this filter?
The filter result is based on n-gram intersection counting approach, which assumes that the word should have the exact form as the internally defined keywords.

Commit message:

Added txt cleansing and Russian language

filters/gender_bias/README.md, after:

## gender bias filter

## What type of a filter is this?

This is a quadrilingual filter (for English, French, Polish and Russian languages), which filters a text corpus to measure gender fairness in regards of a female gender representation.
It is based on a pre-defined set words, such as personal pronouns, words defining the relation and titles, corresponding to the female and male genders accordingly.
Two utility methods - flag_sentences(), count_genders() and sort_groups() give supplementary information to the boolean value returned by the main filter() method.

Author: Anna Shvets
Company:
Fablab by Inetum in Paris
157 Boulevard MacDonald
75019 Paris
France


## Why is measuring performance on this split important?
This filter can be used to define whether the female gender is sufficiently represented in a tested subset of sentences.
Being currently implemented for English, French, Polish and Russian languages, this filter is potentially language-agnostic, since does not rely on any external dependencies.

## Related Work
While the problematics of the gender fairness is an active domain of research in NLP, the current code represents an original implementation.

## Examples of use

```
f = GenderBiasFilter("en")
sentences = [ "He is going to make a cake.",
              "She is going to program",
              "Nobody likes washing dishes",
              "He agreed to help him" ]

f.filter(sentences)
```

The above statement returns True, as the number of sentences flagged as "masculine" is less than the number of sentences tagged as "feminine".
You can check the exact number by calling the `count_genders()` static method on the instance of the class and providing it with the extracted flags with the `flag_sentences()` static method:
```
flagged_sentences = f.flag_sentences(sentences, "en")
feminine, masculine, neutral = f.count_genders(flagged_sentences)
print("Feminine flagged sentences:", feminine)
print("Masculine flagged sentences:", masculine)
print("Neutral flagged sentences:", neutral)
```

which outputs:
```
Feminine tagged sentences: 1
Masculine tagged sentences: 2
Neutral tagged sentences: 1
```
You can also retrieve the arrays of sentences from each group, by calling the `sort_groups()` method on the instance of th class, providing it with flags, extracted by `flag_sentences()` method:

```
flagged_sentences = f.flag_sentences(sentences, "en")
feminine_group, masculine_group, neutral_group = f.sort_groups(flagged_sentences)
print("This is a feminine group:", feminine_group)
print("This is a masculine group:", masculine_group)
print("This is a neutral group:", neutral_group)
```

which outputs:
```
This is a feminine group: ['She is going to program']
This is a masculine group: ['He is going to make a cake.', 'He agreed to help him']
This is a neutral group: ['Nobody likes washing dishes']
```
You are free to change the language at the class initialisation step:
```
sentences = [ "Il va preparer un gateau",
              "Elle va créer un logiciel",
              "Personne n'aime pas faire la vaiselle",
              "Maman va à la conférence" ]

f = GenderBiasFilter("fr")
f.filter(sentences)
```

There is also a possibility to extend the vocabulary of the gender definition keywords. Let us see the example of it:
```
feminine_input = ["wow"]
masculine_input = ["yey"]

f = GenderBiasFilter("en", feminine_input, masculine_input)
sentences = [ "He is going to make a cake.",
              "She is going to program",
              "Nobody likes washing dishes",
              "He agreed to help him",
              "Wow , it works!",
              "Yey !!!!"]

f.filter(sentences)
```
which outputs `True`!
Now let's see the statistics and the sentences that sorted to each of the groups:

```
flagged_sentences = f.flag_sentences(sentences, "en", feminine_input, masculine_input)
feminine, masculine, neutral = f.count_genders(flagged_sentences)
print("Feminine flagged sentences:", feminine)
print("Masculine flagged sentences:", masculine)
print("Neutral flagged sentences:", neutral)
```
outputs:
```
Feminine flagged sentences: 2
Masculine flagged sentences: 3
Neutral flagged sentences: 1
```

and this piece of code gives us the exact sentences:
```
flagged_sentences = f.flag_sentences(sentences, "en", feminine_input, masculine_input)
feminine_group, masculine_group, neutral_group = f.sort_groups(flagged_sentences)
print("This is a feminine group:", feminine_group)
print("This is a masculine group:", masculine_group)
print("This is a neutral group:", neutral_group)
```
which outputs:
```
This is a feminine group: ['She is going to program', 'Wow , it works!']
This is a masculine group: ['He is going to make a cake.', 'He agreed to help him', 'Yey !!!!']
This is a neutral group: ['Nobody likes washing dishes']
```

## What are the limitations of this filter?
The filter result is based on n-gram intersection counting approach, which assumes that the word should have the exact form as the internally defined keywords.
For the lexically rich languages, such as Polish and Russian, the nouns conjugation may overlap the infinitif of an opposite gender.
For example, the word "nastolatek" is a teenage boy in infinitif, "nastolatka" - a teenage girl in infinitif, however, when answering the question "Whom are we missing?", the feminine form in plural ("nastolatki" in infinitif) will give the word "nastolatek", which overlaps with the masculin singular infinitif, designating a teenage boy.
