transformations/README.md, before:

### The List of Transformations

This directory contains transformations that are part of the Natural Language Augmenter (NL-Augmenter). Each subdirectory contains a single transformation (or a filter for a contrast set). A summary table of these transformation follows.

| Transformation                             | Description                                                                       
| ------- | -----------                          
| [back_translation](back_translation)              | Converts an English sentence to German and back to English                
| [butter_fingers_perturbation](butter_fingers_perturbation)     | Adds noise to all types of text sources (sentence, paragraph, etc.) proportional to noise emanating from keyboard typos making common spelling errors.  
| [change_person_named_entities](change_person_named_entities)        | Changes person named entities: Alex travels to the city everyday! --> Jacob travels to the city everyday! 
| [change_two_way_ne](change_two_way_ne)                   | Changes the named entity in the source sentence and reflects the same change in the target sentence. Benefits Machine Translation tasks.
| [longer_names_ner](longer_names_ner)        | Elongates person names: Russel Peters is a comedian. --> Russel J. M. Peters is a comedian. 
| [mixed_language_perturbation](mixed_language_perturbation) | This perturbation translates randomly picked words in the text from English to other languages (e.g., German). It can be used to test the robustness of a model in a multilingual setting.
| [without_punctuation](punctuation)        | Welcome to New York city! --> Welcome to New York city
| [replace_numerical_values](replace_numerical_values)        | Changes numerical values. Jason's 3 sisters want to move back to India --> Jason's 6 sisters want to move back to India
| [redundant_context_for_qa](redundant_context_for_qa)        | Duplicates the context in a QA setting. (context, question, short-answer) --> (context+context, question, short-answer)
| [lexical_counterfactual_generator](lexical_counterfactual_generator)        | Generates a counterfactual example. (sentence1, sentence2, label) --> (sentence1, sentence2, label)
| [suspecting_paraphraser](suspecting_paraphraser)        | Transforms a yes/no question into a ![tag one](https://www.englishclub.com/grammar/tag-questions.htm). (Did he drink that tea? -> He drank that tea, didn't he?)

Commit message:

Updated README.md to point to concat

transformations/README.md, after:

### The List of Transformations

This directory contains transformations that are part of the Natural Language Augmenter (NL-Augmenter). Each subdirectory contains a single transformation (or a filter for a contrast set). A summary table of these transformation follows.

| Transformation                             | Description                                                                       
| ------- | -----------                          
| [back_translation](back_translation)              | Converts an English sentence to German and back to English                
| [butter_fingers_perturbation](butter_fingers_perturbation)     | Adds noise to all types of text sources (sentence, paragraph, etc.) proportional to noise emanating from keyboard typos making common spelling errors.  
| [change_person_named_entities](change_person_named_entities)        | Changes person named entities: Alex travels to the city everyday! --> Jacob travels to the city everyday! 
| [change_two_way_ne](change_two_way_ne)                   | Changes the named entity in the source sentence and reflects the same change in the target sentence. Benefits Machine Translation tasks.
| [concat](concat)[concat_monolingual](concat_monolingual)    | Concatenates the previous sentence to the current one (bilingual and monolingual versions). This helps in low-resource Machine Translation by showing longer examples, position shifts, and contexts.
| [longer_names_ner](longer_names_ner)        | Elongates person names: Russel Peters is a comedian. --> Russel J. M. Peters is a comedian. 
| [mixed_language_perturbation](mixed_language_perturbation) | This perturbation translates randomly picked words in the text from English to other languages (e.g., German). It can be used to test the robustness of a model in a multilingual setting.
| [without_punctuation](punctuation)        | Welcome to New York city! --> Welcome to New York city
| [replace_numerical_values](replace_numerical_values)        | Changes numerical values. Jason's 3 sisters want to move back to India --> Jason's 6 sisters want to move back to India
| [redundant_context_for_qa](redundant_context_for_qa)        | Duplicates the context in a QA setting. (context, question, short-answer) --> (context+context, question, short-answer)
| [lexical_counterfactual_generator](lexical_counterfactual_generator)        | Generates a counterfactual example. (sentence1, sentence2, label) --> (sentence1, sentence2, label)
| [suspecting_paraphraser](suspecting_paraphraser)        | Transforms a yes/no question into a ![tag one](https://www.englishclub.com/grammar/tag-questions.htm). (Did he drink that tea? -> He drank that tea, didn't he?)
